Blog post about using Istio multi-mesh for isolation and boundary protection (#4776)
istio/istio.io: content/blog/2019/mesh-federation/index.md

---
title: Mesh Federation
subtitle: Connect multiple service meshes ad hoc, with limited service exposure and strict cross-cluster access control
description: Connect multiple service meshes ad hoc, with limited service exposure and strict cross-cluster access control.
publishdate: 2019-08-12
attribution: Vadim Eisenberg (IBM)
keywords: [traffic-management,multicluster,security,gateway,tls]
---

> Managing applications across multiple Kubernetes clusters is currently one of the hottest topics in Kubernetes and Istio

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Managing applications across multiple Kubernetes clusters is currently one of the hottest topics in the Kubernetes and Istio
```

communities. You may need to split your applications between multiple clusters for different reasons, for example:

-  scalability limits of a single cluster
-  separation of production/dev/test/staging environments
-  different security and compliance requirements for different parts of the application
-  running parts of the application on multiple public clouds, and on a private cloud

> Currently there are [three patterns](/docs/setup/kubernetes/install/multicluster/) in Istio to create a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently there are [three documented patterns](/docs/setup/kubernetes/install/multicluster/) in Istio to create a
```

> Currently there are [three patterns](/docs/setup/kubernetes/install/multicluster/) in Istio to create a

Reviewer 2: You say there are 3 patterns, but I don't see where you call them out here. As the reader I would immediately expect bullets listing the patterns. If you're relying on the link, I don't think that's sufficient for the reader.

[multicluster service mesh](/docs/concepts/multicluster-deployments/#multicluster-service-mesh).

> A _multicluster service mesh_ is a single _logical_ service mesh, spread among multiple Kubernetes clusters.

Reviewer 2: This statement seems misleading WRT terminology. All service meshes are logical.

> Such a service mesh has the following characteristics:

Reviewer 2: I feel that this is simply the definition of a service mesh, not a particular type of service mesh. They way this is stated is a bit confusing since it seems like this is somehow different from other types of meshes. It might be better to start out by defining the properties of a service mesh and then go on to show how these properties can be maintained with a multi-cluster topology.

> - **uniform identical naming** of namespaces and services. The `withdraw` service in the `accounts` namespace in one

Reviewer 2: nit: do we need `identical` here? I think `uniform naming` is sufficient, no?

Author: Uniform vs identical: hostnames on the Web are uniform (FQDN) but not identical.
Uniform and identical naming means that the organisation defined the form of the names for all the clusters and also has means to enforce that the same name means the same thing in all its clusters.

Author: Actually, the Web is a wrong example. Let me remove the `indentical` and leave `uniform` naming, you are right.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure this distinction is entirely useful for a doc such as this. However, you could just say `identical naming` then, since identical would imply uniformity.

> cluster has the same functionality and API as the `withdraw` service in the `accounts` namespace in all other clusters

Reviewer 2: This sentence is a little dense. Maybe we can reword:

*For example, the `withdraw` service in the `account` namespace of cluster 1 is considered to be the same service as `withdraw` in the `account` namespace of cluster 2.*

in the mesh.

> - **expose-all by default**. All the services are exposed by default to all the clusters in the mesh.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we need this bullet at all. If we're saying that all clusters are part of the same mesh then this is implied. This seems like it may be adding a bit of complexity to our definition here.

Author: This bullet states the implied feature explicitly, to later contrast with Mesh Federation where the behaviour is "expose-nothing by default".

Reviewer 2: To my broader point ... this doc is titled "Mesh federation". We shouldn't even be discussing things which are not related to federation.

> - **common identity and common trust** are established between all the clusters in the mesh.

Reviewer 2: nit: "common identity and trust"?

Author: @nmittler Fixed in https://github.com/istio/istio.io/pull/4776/commits/fd0189f7fd67ab8f5997208d9e201756ff0e7718, thanks.

> The three patterns differ by the following aspects:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The differences between the three patterns are the following:
```

> - The clusters are on a **single network** or on **multiple networks**. Single network means that the pods in one

Reviewer 2: This section makes me feel like the reader should first be introduced to the concepts of Istio topologies. I am currently working with the docs team on a first cut of an Istio Topologies concept doc which should be out for review in PR form shortly. I think that doc needs to land on istio.io before this does.

Author: @nmittler please note that I propose this blog post to preliminary.istio.io, not to merge it into istio.io yet. Once the terminology changes, I am OK with changing the terms in this blog post.

Reviewer 2: That doesn't really help, since preliminary.istio.io is just a staging area for istio.io. If this lands first, then we're under the gun to make sure my PR is also merged and that we retroactively fix this blog before we cut a release. Not a good workflow.

Reviewer: I think I agree with @nmittler that there is too much talk about multicluster mesh in this blog. The blog doesn't really need to talk about the existing documented multicluster patterns, and how they differ, but should just minimally explain what's different about mesh federation, and then follow through with the example.

The concepts doc should explain all the details about multicluster and more details about mesh federation too.

That said, I do think we need to update the concepts doc asap (for 1.3) so even if this blog tries to be vague about the multicluster details, it will probably need to be at least minimally updated when the concepts update lands, but that's not a big problem if the blog stays high level enough.

@nmittler What's the ETA for your concepts PR? Is it complimentary or a replacement of https://github.com/istio/istio.io/pull/4725

Reviewer 2: Already handed my draft of the docs to our docs team who will be turning it into a PR shortly.  It's targeted for 1.3.

Reviewer 3: @nmittler @rcaballeromx had indicated the draft PRs are targeted for 14...

cluster can reach the pods in other clusters directly. Multiple networks means that the pods in one cluster can reach
the pods in other clusters in the mesh only through corresponding ingress gateways.
- The Istio control planes are **shared** between the clusters in the mesh or each cluster has its own **dedicated**
control plane.

> There are use cases when you want to connect service meshes in separate clusters while limiting exposure of services

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are use cases where none of the multicluster patterns apply, for example, when you want to connect service meshes in separate clusters while limiting exposure of services
```

> There are use cases when you want to connect service meshes in separate clusters while limiting exposure of services

Reviewer 2: Ok so this is mesh federation.  It took way too long to get here. I suggest moving discussion of what mesh federation is the top.

Author: @nmittler I agree that we can remove the single multi-cluster meshes descriptions altogether and start with mesh federation immediately. However, it will not be clear what is the difference with the single multi-cluster meshes. We can put the comparison at the end or we can add it later. Let's see what is the opinion of other people and consider the alternatives.

Reviewer 2: I suggest you rework this into a series of blog posts, where each addresses a different use case of Istio topology. The first post can just be the concepts and identifying the use cases you'll tackle in subsequent blogs.

from one cluster to other clusters. You also want _expose-nothing_ behavior by default, to prevent accidental
exposure of your services.
You may want strict control of which clusters may consume specific services of the
exposing cluster, as part of
[boundary protection](https://insights.sei.cmu.edu/insider-threat/2018/09/cybersecurity-architecture-part-2-system-boundary-and-boundary-protection.html)
for some of the clusters. Sometimes different clusters are operated by different organizations that do not have common

> naming rules and didn't establish common trust.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
naming rules and have not established common trust.
```

The Istio community has not yet decided on the right name for such a loosely-coupled
connection between independent service meshes. One of the proposed names is _mesh federation_. While I use this name in
this blog post, I do not claim that it is the best name for this pattern.

In this blog post I describe requirements for _mesh federation_ and propose a possible solution for it. I don't claim

> that this is the best solution, the goal of the blog post is to share it with the community and the users, to get their

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that this is the best or only solution. The goal of this blog post is to share an approach with the community and to get user
```

## Requirements for mesh federation

- **non-uniform naming**. The `withdraw` service in the `accounts` namespace in one cluster might have
different functionality and API than the `withdraw` services in the `accounts` namespace in other clusters. The same
service with the same functionality can have different names and can reside in different namespaces in different
clusters.
For example, the same service can be called `withdraw` and `withdraw-funds`, and can reside in the `accounts` and
`private-accounts` namespaces in different clusters. Such situation could happen in an organization where there is no
uniform policy on naming of namespaces and services, or when the clusters belong to different organizations.
- **expose-nothing by default**. None of the services in a cluster are exposed by default, the cluster owners must
explicitly specify which services are exposed.
- **boundary protection**. The access control of the traffic must be enforced at the ingress gateway, which stops
forbidden traffic from entering the cluster. This requirement implements
[Defense-in-depth principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Defense_in_depth_(computing)) and is part of some compliance

> standards, such as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
standards, such as the
```

[Payment Card Industry (PCI) Data Security Standard](https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/pci_security/).
- **common trust may not exist**. The Istio sidecars in one cluster may not trust the Citadel certificates in other
cluster, due to some security requirement or due to the fact that the cluster owners did not initially plan to couple
the clusters.

### Isolation of system components and boundary protection

> Isolation of system components and boundary protection is the most important use case for mesh federation, in my

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In my opinion, isolation of system components and boundary protection is the most important use case for mesh federation.
```

> opinion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> Isolation and boundary protection mechanisms are explained in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Isolation and boundary protection mechanisms are explained in the
```

{{< quote >}}
Organizations can isolate information system components performing different missions and/or business functions.
Such isolation limits unauthorized information flows among system components and also provides the opportunity to deploy
greater levels of protection for selected components. Separating system components with boundary protection mechanisms
provides the capability for increased protection of individual components and to more effectively control information
flows between those components. This type of enhanced protection limits the potential harm from cyber attacks and
errors. The degree of separation provided varies depending upon the mechanisms chosen. Boundary protection mechanisms
include, for example, routers, gateways, and firewalls separating system components into physically separate networks or
subnetworks, cross-domain devices separating subnetworks, virtualization techniques, and encrypting information flows
among system components using distinct encryption keys.
{{< /quote >}}

Various compliance standards recommend isolating environments that process sensitive data from the rest of the

> organization. [Payment Card Industry (PCI) Data Security Standard](https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/pci_security/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
organization. The [Payment Card Industry (PCI) Data Security Standard](https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/pci_security/)
```

_Appendix G, Authorization Boundary Considerations_:

{{< quote >}}
Dividing a system into subsystems (i.e., divide and conquer) facilitates a targeted application of controls to achieve
adequate security, protection of individual privacy, and a cost-effective risk management process. Dividing complex
systems into subsystems also supports the important security concepts of domain separation and network segmentation,
which can be significant when dealing with high value assets. When systems are divided into subsystems, organizations
may choose to develop individual subsystem security and privacy plans or address the system and subsystems in the same
security and privacy plans.
Information security and privacy architectures play a key part in the process of dividing complex systems into
subsystems. This includes monitoring and controlling communications at internal boundaries among subsystems and
selecting, allocating, and implementing controls that meet or exceed the security and privacy requirements of the
constituent subsystems.
{{< /quote >}}

> The proposed mesh federation facilitates division of a system into subsystems with different security and compliance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proposed mesh federation approach facilitates division of a system into subsystems with different security and compliance
```
